Docker-Build blog post (#4211)
pulumi/pulumi-hugo: themes/default/content/blog/docker-build/index.md

# date/time.
date: 2024-04-18T15:12:33-07:00

# The draft setting determines whether a post is published. Set it to true if
# you want to be able to merge the post without publishing it.
draft: false

# Use the meta_desc property to provide a brief summary (one or two sentences)
# of the content of the post, which is useful for targeting search results or
# social-media previews. This field is required or the build will fail the
# linter test. Max length is 160 characters.
meta_desc: >-
    Pulumi's new Docker Build provider offers support for Docker builds using modern buildx/BuildKit APIs.

# The meta_image appears in social-media previews and on the blog home page. A
# placeholder image representing the recommended format, dimensions and aspect
# ratio has been provided for you.
meta_image: meta.png

# At least one author is required. The values in this list correspond with the
# `id` properties of the team member files at /data/team/team. Create a file for
# yourself if you don't already have one.
authors:
    - bryce-lampe

# At least one tag is required. Lowercase, hyphen-delimited is recommended.
tags:
    - docker
    - buildx

>     - buildkit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - buildkit
    - containers
```

                .username(authToken.applyValue(getAuthorizationTokenResult -> getAuthorizationTokenResult).applyValue(authToken -> authToken.applyValue(getAuthorizationTokenResult -> getAuthorizationTokenResult.userName())))
                .build())
            .tags(ecrRepository.repositoryUrl().applyValue(repositoryUrl -> String.format("%s:latest", repositoryUrl)))
            .build());

        ctx.export("ref", myImage.ref());
    }
}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

The exported `ref` value provides a convenient way to reference the pushed
image in downstream Pulumi resources like ECS
[TaskDefinitions](https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/aws/api-docs/ecs/taskdefinition/)
or Kubernetes
[Deployments](https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/kubernetes/api-docs/apps/v1/deployment/).

## Why a new provider?

The [Pulumi Docker] provider was first introduced in 2018 and has seen wide
adoption. Over the years Pulumi has continued our investment in it, notably
introducing a version 4.0 [last year](../build-images-50x-faster-docker-v4) and

> additional improvements to build-on-preview behavior after that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
additional improvements like _build-on-preview_ behavior after that.
```

        network: "host",
        platform: "linux/amd64",
    },
    buildOnPreview: true,
    registry: {
        server: "myregistry.com",
        username: "username",
        password: pulumi.secret("password"),
    },
});

// v4 Image after migrating to docker-build.Image
const v4Migrated = new dockerbuild.Image("v4-to-buildx", {
    tags: ["myregistry.com/user/repo:latest"],
    push: true,
    dockerfile: {
        location: "./Dockerfile",
    },
    context: {
        location: "../app",
    },
    target: "mytarget",
    buildArgs: {
        MY_BUILD_ARG: "foo",
    },
    cacheFrom: [{ registry: { ref: "myregistry.com/user/repo:cache" } }],
    cacheTo: [{ registry: { ref: "myregistry.com/user/repo:cache" } }],
    addHosts: ["metadata.google.internal:169.254.169.254"],
    network: "host",
    platforms: ["linux/amd64"],
    registries: [{
        address: "myregistry.com",
        username: "username",
        password: pulumi.secret("password"),
    }],
});

```

[BuildKit]: https://docs.docker.com/build/buildkit/
[Pulumi Docker]: https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/docker/
[inline cache]: https://docs.docker.com/build/cache/backends/inline/

### Conclusion

> The launch of the new Docker-Build provider marks a significant milestone in enhancing container management for developers. Leveraging the latest BuildKit technology, this tool is a testament to our commitment to innovation and user-driven development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The launch of the new Docker-Build provider marks a significant milestone in modernizing container management for developers. Leveraging the latest BuildKit technology, this tool is a testament to our commitment to innovation and user-driven development.
```

---
title: "Introducing the new Docker Build provider"
date: 2024-04-25T09:00:00-07:00
draft: false
meta_desc: >-
    Pulumi's new Docker Build provider offers support for Docker builds using modern buildx/BuildKit APIs.
meta_image: meta.png
authors:
    - bryce-lampe
tags:
    - docker
    - buildx
    - buildkit
    - containers
---

Deploying and managing containerized workloads is one of Pulumi's fastest-growing areas. Standing up managed container services and Kubernetes clusters is a common area for automation, and many of our customers use Pulumi to automate building and publishing images to their registry of choice.

> Given this critical use case, we are thrilled to introduce the latest addition to the Pulumi ecosystem: the new [Docker Build provider](https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/docker-build/), designed to streamline and modernize Docker image builds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given this critical use case, we are thrilled to introduce the latest addition to the Pulumi ecosystem: the new [Docker Build provider](https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/docker-build/), designed to streamline and modernize Docker image builds from your Pulumi programs.
```

## Migrating from docker.Image to docker_build.Image

The new `docker_build.Image` replaces the old `docker.Image` resource. It adds new features and addresses many bugs with the previous resource by fully aligning with Docker's underlying [buildx] commands. From now on, we will continue to invest in Docker Build and the `docker_build.Image` resource.

We do not expect to make further changes to `docker.Image`. It will remain available for the foreseeable future, so you can continue using it if it meets your needs. However, we **recommend** you migrate your images to `docker_build.Image` to get the best possible support, features, and performance. We expect to deprecate the `docker.Image` resource in the future.

The migration process is straightforward and detailed in the [API documentation](https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/docker-build/api-docs/image/). Docker Build provides a superset functionality over the previous

> `docker.Image` resource; thus, you can migrate existing resources without issue. The new Docker Build Image options will look very familiar if you are familiar with the Docker command-line tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`docker.Image` resource; thus, you can migrate existing resources without issue. The new Docker Build Image options will look very familiar if you use the Docker command-line tool.
```

This addition builds on the solid foundation of our widely utilized [Pulumi Docker] provider.
By embracing the power of Docker's [BuildKit] technology, this provider enhances your building experience, allowing you to modernize your image builds.
This launch signifies our ongoing commitment to advancing technology and empowering developers to achieve new heights in container management.

The Docker-Build provider is crafted to optimize the efficiency and versatility of Docker builds and offers developers a more potent and flexible approach to building Docker images, ensuring that they can achieve high performance and scalability in their deployment workflows.
The new provider exposes the full power of Docker's next-gen [buildx](https://docs.docker.com/reference/cli/docker/buildx/build/) functionality and includes key features such as,

* __Multi-platform image support__: Build images that run seamlessly across different hardware architectures.

* __Advanced caching mechanisms__: Utilize various caching strategies to speed up builds and reduce resource consumption.

> * __Support for secrets and Pulumi [ESC](../environments-secrets-configurations-management) (Environments, Secrets and Configuration)__: Safely manage sensitive information and configuration with first-class support, integrating seamlessly into your deployment workflows.

Reviewer 2: I don't see any later mention of this (and actually - I'm not exactly sure what this is referring to?).

Author: Tried to clarify these. The example shows caching specifically.

> * __Support for multiple export types__: Increase the power and flexibility of your workflows by exporting your images to registries, disk, or blob storage.

Reviewer 2: I don't see any later mention of this.  Worth adding into an example or providing more details elsewhere in the post?

> * __Support for Docker Build Cloud__: Take advantage of [Docker Build Cloud](https://www.docker.com/products/build-cloud/) to scale your build processes effortlessly and manage build resources dynamically, enhancing productivity and performance.

Reviewer 2: We don't seem to have any content on this in the rest of the blog post, but it seems like one of the key exciting parts of this?  Let's add a section with details and an example for this!

For background, the [Pulumi Docker] provider was first introduced in 2018 and
has seen wide adoption.
Over the years Pulumi has continued our investment in it, notably introducing a
version 4.0 [last year](../build-images-50x-faster-docker-v4) and additional
improvements like build-on-preview behavior after that.

At the same time, the Docker build ecosystem has seen tremendous advancements
in how images can be built and distributed. These changes were initially
experimental, but they became official when [BuildKit] graduated to become the
default builder in Docker version 23.

We have heard a large number of requests from users to expose more [BuildKit]
functionality in the Pulumi Docker provider. After some consideration, we
decided that a new, standalone provider, focused exclusively on building
images, would provide the best overall user experience as well as the best
platform for Pulumi to stay current with the evolving build landscape.

## Getting started

{{< chooser language "typescript,python,csharp,go,yaml,java" / >}}

> Add the "docker-build" package to your project to start taking advantage of modern image builds with Pulumi.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the `docker-build` package to your project to start taking advantage of modern image builds with Pulumi.
```

> Add the "docker-build" package to your project to start taking advantage of modern image builds with Pulumi.

Reviewer 2: Instead of this code snippet that just shows the import statement, is it worth having a full example of the simplest possible use case?  Like https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/docker/api-docs/image/#a-docker-image-build-and-push.

This also helps given that the next example is quite complex (which is nice, but feels like we're skipping a step of showing the basic use case of just this new provider/resource).

{{% choosable language typescript %}}

```typescript
import * as docker_build from "@pulumi/docker-build";
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language python %}}

```python
import pulumi_docker_build as docker_build
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language csharp %}}

```csharp
using DockerBuild = Pulumi.DockerBuild;
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language go %}}

```go
import "github.com/pulumi/pulumi-docker-build/sdk/go/dockerbuild"
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language yaml %}}

```yaml
resources:
    my-image:
        type: docker-build:Image
```

{{% /choosable %}}
{{% choosable language java %}}

```java
import com.pulumi.dockerbuild.Image
```

{{% /choosable %}}

> If your Pulumi program has a directory called `app` alongside it, containing a

Reviewer 2: Worth giving some details on how this uses the new features, and the benefits it gets as a result?  (Multi-platform and caching)?

                "linux/amd64",
                "linux/arm64")
            // Push the final result to ECR.
            .push(true)
            // Provide our ECR credentials.
            .registries(RegistryArgs.builder()
                .address(ecrRepository.repositoryUrl())
                .password(authToken.applyValue(getAuthorizationTokenResult -> getAuthorizationTokenResult).applyValue(authToken -> authToken.applyValue(getAuthorizationTokenResult -> getAuthorizationTokenResult.password())))
                .username(authToken.applyValue(getAuthorizationTokenResult -> getAuthorizationTokenResult).applyValue(authToken -> authToken.applyValue(getAuthorizationTokenResult -> getAuthorizationTokenResult.userName())))
                .build())
            .build());

        ctx.export("ref", myImage.ref());
    }
}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

The exported `ref` value provides a convenient way to reference the pushed
image in downstream Pulumi resources like ECS
[TaskDefinitions](https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/aws/api-docs/ecs/taskdefinition/)
or Kubernetes
[Deployments](https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/kubernetes/api-docs/apps/v1/deployment/).

> ## Migrating Docker images to Docker-Build

Reviewer 2: Perhaps make more clear what this is referencing?

```suggestion
## Migrating from `docker.Image` to `docker_build.Image`
```

> If you are already using the [Pulumi Docker] provider to build images there is

Reviewer 2: I think we want to invert this framing.
1. The `docker_build.Image` resource is a replacement for the old `docker.Image` resource which adds many new features and addresses many existing bug reports, by aligning fully with the underlying Docker BuildX system.
2. Going forward, improvements to Docker Build support will be delivered via continued improvements to `docker_build.Image`.  We do not expect to make further changes to `docker.Image`.
3. `docker.Image` will remain available for the forseeable future, so users can continue using it if it still meets their needs.  However, we recommend users move to `docker_build.Image` to get the best possible support, features and performance.
4. In the future, we expect we will likely deprecate the `docker.Image` resource.

        network: "host",
        platform: "linux/amd64",
    },
    buildOnPreview: true,
    registry: {
        server: "myregistry.com",
        username: "username",
        password: pulumi.secret("password"),
    },
});

// v4 Image after migrating to docker-build.Image
const v4Migrated = new dockerbuild.Image("v4-to-buildx", {
    tags: ["myregistry.com/user/repo:latest"],
    push: true,
    dockerfile: {
        location: "./Dockerfile",
    },
    context: {
        location: "../app",
    },
    target: "mytarget",
    buildArgs: {
        MY_BUILD_ARG: "foo",
    },
    cacheFrom: [{ registry: { ref: "myregistry.com/user/repo:cache" } }],
    cacheTo: [{ registry: { ref: "myregistry.com/user/repo:cache" } }],
    addHosts: ["metadata.google.internal:169.254.169.254"],
    network: "host",
    platforms: ["linux/amd64"],
    registries: [{
        address: "myregistry.com",
        username: "username",
        password: pulumi.secret("password"),
    }],
});

```

[BuildKit]: https://docs.docker.com/build/buildkit/
[Pulumi Docker]: https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/docker/
[inline cache]: https://docs.docker.com/build/cache/backends/inline/

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer 2: I think we can be more "pragmatic" here - restate the intro value props:
1. New package
2. Replacing the `docker.Image` resource
3. Brings new support for the latest Docker features
4. Multi-arch builds
5. Caching
6. Docker Build Cloud

Your feedback is crucial to our ongoing improvement efforts.
As we look ahead, we are dedicated to incorporating your insights to further enhance the Docker-Build provider. Let's continue to refine and advance our tools together.

For more details on how to utilize the Docker-Build provider, check out our [documentation](https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/docker-build/image/).

If you are still wondering "Which provider should I use?" the answer depends on
whether you are doing anything related to `docker build`.

| Provider               | Use cases                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| ----------------       | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------                                                                                                           |

> | `@pulumi/docker-build` | Use this provider primarily for building Docker images. Ideal for scenarios requiring automation of image creation with Docker, including setting up CI/CD pipelines for Docker image generation.                                                                  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `@pulumi/docker-build` | Use this provider for building and pushing Docker images. Ideal for scenarios requiring automation of image creation with Docker, including setting up CI/CD pipelines for Docker image generation.                                                                  |
```

> | `@pulumi/docker`       | Suitable for broader Docker operations beyond just building images. This includes running Docker containers, managing container lifecycles, orchestrating Docker networks, and handling volumes. Recommended for general Docker management within Pulumi projects. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `@pulumi/docker`       | Use this provider for managing local Docker containers, images, networks and volumes on the current machine.  |
```
